auth/saml: adds documentation (#23183)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/auth/saml.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: SAML - Auth Methods
description: |-
  The "saml" auth method allows users to authenticate with Vault using their

>   identity in a SAML Identity Provider.

Author: I copy/pasted this after looking at a majority of other front matter in other auth method docs. Would you prefer to diverge from that consistency here?

My understanding is that the auth method docs are not supposed to be step-by-step guides. That is what the Vault learn tutorials are for. There is one in progress for the SAML auth method at https://github.com/hashicorp/tutorials/pull/1704. I'm not really sure what to call this type of documentation (reference docs)?

---

# SAML Auth Method

<EnterpriseAlert />

The `saml` auth method allows users to authentication with Vault using their identity
within a [SAML V2.0](https://saml.xml.org/saml-specifications) Identity Provider.

> Authentication is suited for human users by requiring interaction with a web browser.

Author: I don't believe the Vault auth method docs are supposed to be step-by-step tutorials. I think my original description is more descriptive of what the auth method provides. It's also more consistent with the description of other Vault auth methods.

> ## Authentication

Author: I chose these three second-level headings (Authentication, Configuration, API) because they're most consistent with the rest of our auth method documentation. My understanding is that purpose of the "Authentication" section is to provide details on how to authenticate using the auth method. This is targeted at a different persona than the "Configuration" section.

Would it be okay to keep this consistent with the majority of the Vault auth method docs?

1. Press "Sign in with SAML Provider" and complete the authentication with the
   configured SAML Identity Provider.

### Via the CLI

The CLI login defaults to the path of `/saml`. If this auth method was enabled at a
different path, specify `-path=/my-path` in the CLI.

```shell-session
$ vault login -method=saml role=admin

Complete the login via your SAML provider. Launching browser to:

    https://company.okta.com/app/vault/abc123eb9xnIfzlaf697/sso/saml?SAMLRequest=fJI9b9swEIZ3%2FwqBu0SJ%2FpBDRAZce4iBtDViN0MX40Sda...
```

The default browser will open to the generated URL where the user must authenticate with
the configured SAML Identity Provider. The URL may be manually entered into the browser
if it cannot be automatically opened.

The CLI login behavior may be customized with the following optional parameters:

- `skip_browser` (default: `false`): If set to `true`, automatic launching of the default
  browser will be skipped. The SAML Identity Provider URL must be manually entered in a
  browser to complete the authentication flow.
- `abort_on_error` (default: `false`): If set to `true`, failure to launch the default

>   browser will result in a non-zero exit of the CLI and an error displayed.

Author: Used tabs and applied most suggestions in https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/pull/23183/commits/2e2a91b0391b6a7dff4a01152b86d668682a8754.

> ## Configuration

Reviewer: Follow-up question: from context, I'm guessing that the "Configuration" section is meant to explain how folks can set up SAML authN and the "Authentication" section is meant to explain how Vault users would subsequently use SAML to authenticate, is that right?

If so, I'd recommend swapping the order of the sections so we're telling folks how to set up the authentication method before talking about how to use it.

> ## Configuration

Author: > Follow-up question: from context, I'm guessing that the "Configuration" section is meant to explain how folks can set up SAML authN and the "Authentication" section is meant to explain how Vault users would subsequently use SAML to authenticate, is that right?

That's correct! I followed this ordering because it is most consistent with the rest of the Vault auth method docs. My understanding is that these docs aren't supposed to read as step-by-step tutorials. I believe that the "Authentication" section comes first because a majority of Vault users are not the admin persona. The admin persona is interested in the "Configuration" section.

Would it be okay to leave the section headings and ordering to be consistent with the rest of the auth method docs?

Auth methods must be configured in advance before users or machines can
authenticate. These steps are usually completed by an operator or configuration

> management tool.

Author: These two sentences are consistent across the "Configuration" section for all Vault auth methods. Would you like this one to diverge from that?

> 1. Enable the SAML auth method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Enable the SAML authentication method with the `auth enable` CLI command:
```

Style correction: introduce CLI commands before providing example text so it's easier for readers to parse the command from other information.

Author: Thanks!

   ```shell-session
   $ vault auth enable saml
   ```

> 1. Use the `/config` endpoint to save the configuration of your SAML Identity Provider and
>    set the default role. You can configure the trust relationship with the SAML Identity
>    Provider by either providing a URL for its Metadata document:
> 
>    ```shell-session
>    $ vault write auth/saml/config \
>       default_role=admin \
>       idp_metadata_url=https://company.okta.com/app/abc123eb9xnIfzlaf697/sso/saml/metadata \
>       entity_id="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml" \
>       acs_urls="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback"
>    ```
> 
>    or by setting the configuration Metadata manually:
> 
>    ```shell-session
>    $ vault write auth/saml/config \
>       default_role=admin \
>       idp_sso_url=https://company.okta.com/app/abc123eb9xnIfzlaf697/sso/saml \
>       idp_entity_id=https://www.okta.com/abc123eb9xnIfzlaf697 \
>       idp_cert=@path/to/cert.pem \
>       entity_id="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml" \
>       acs_urls="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback"
>    ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
1. Use the `write` command to save your SAML identity provider configuration to
   the desired path, for example `auth/saml/config \`. You can configure the
   trust relationship with the SAML identity provider in two ways. You can
   provide a URL for the relevant metadata document:

    ```shell-session
    $ vault write auth/saml/config                        \
        default_role=admin                                \
        entity_id="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml"         \
        acs_urls="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback" \
        idp_metadata_url=https://company.okta.com/app/abc123eb9xnIfzlaf697/sso/saml/metadata
    ```
   
   Or, you can set the metadata details manually:

    ```shell-session
    $ vault write auth/saml/config                              \
        default_role=admin                                      \
        entity_id="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml"               \
        acs_urls="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback"       \
        idp_cert=@path/to/cert.pem                              \
        idp_entity_id=https://www.okta.com/abc123eb9xnIfzlaf697 \
        idp_sso_url=https://company.okta.com/app/abc123eb9xnIfzlaf697/sso/saml
    ```
````

In general, we shouldn't refer to CLI commands as endpoints. Reserve "endpoint" for explicit API calls (e.g., cURL, SDK code) and refer to calls wrapped by the CLI as CLI commands.

> 1. Create a named role:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use the `write` command to create the default role specified in the SAML
   identity provider configuration. For example, the command below authorizes
   users in the `admin` group with the `@hashicorp.com` suffix for SAML
   authentication. Valid users will receive a token with a time-to-live of 1 hour
  for the `writer` policy.
```
Style correction: explain what the example command does before showing it.

   ```shell-session
    $ vault write auth/saml/role/admin \
       bound_subjects="*@hashicorp.com" \
       bound_subjects_type="glob" \
       token_policies="writer" \
       bound_attributes=group="admin" \
       ttl=1h
   ```

>    This role authorizes users that have a subject with an `@hashicorp.com` suffix and
>    are in the `admin` group to authenticate. It also gives the resulting Vault token a
>    time-to-live of 1 hour and the `writer` policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Include the explanation in the previous line where you're introducing the command.

> 

Reviewer: Pulled from the next section to complete setup instructions.

````suggestion
1. Use the [`acs_urls`](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#acs_urls) parameter with the
   `write` command to configure where the SAML response should go once users
   authenticate with the configured SAML identity provider in their browser.
   For example:

    ```shell-session
    $ vault write auth/saml/config \
      acs_urls="https://my.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback"
    ```

  You can provide multiple URLs with the `acs_urls` parameter to support a single
  auth method mount across Vault [replication](/vault/docs/enterprise/replication)
  clusters. For example, to support SAML authentication on a primary cluster at
  `primary.vault` and a secondary cluster at `secondary.vault`:

    ```shell-session
    $ vault write auth/saml/config \
      acs_urls="https://primary.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback,https://secondary.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback"
    ```
````

>    For the complete list of configuration options, please see the
>    [API documentation](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to full SAML  [API documentation](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml) for a
complete list of configuration options.
```

Referring readers to the API reference is essentially a "next step" suggestion, it's not really part of the previous step, so it doesn't need to be indented. But it might make sense to add a `## Next steps` heading to make it clear they've reached the end of the instructions.

> ### Assertion Consumer Service URLs

Reviewer: Is this step 2 in the setup? Or have we changed topics? From context it seems like a combination of one required setup step (configuring the assertion URLs) and a bunch of optional recommendations/best practices?

I recommend breaking any technical overview content and the how-to instructions into their own documents. 

The technical overview (e.g., "SAML authentication overview") should have a path like `/docs/auth/saml/index.mdx`, and the how-to instruction should have a path like `docs/auth/saml/setup.mdx`.

For the sake of the review, I'm going to treat the overview content below this point as a separate document.

Author: This section is meant to provide further details on a particular aspect of the configuration. I followed this pattern because it is common across other Vault documentation for auth methods and secrets engines. Generally, I observed consistent sections (e.g., Authentication, Configuration) followed by free-form sections that dive into more details. I understand that may not be optimal for readers. I'm just trying to explain how this got here 🙂 

Would your recommendation be the same given that this document isn't targeted to be a step-by-step tutorial?

> The [`acs_urls`](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#acs_urls) configuration parameter determines
> where the SAML Response will be sent after users authenticate with the configured SAML
> Identity Provider in their browser.
> 
> The values provided to Vault must:
> 
> - Match or be a subset of the configured values for the SAML application within the
>   configured Identity Provider.
> - Be directed to the auth method's [Assertion Consumer Service
>   Callback](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#assertion-consumer-service-callback) API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Include the ACL config example in the explicit how-to instructions. I believe the value requirements were in the API docs already, I'm not sure it's necessary to repeat them here unless we intend to provide additional context about how the process works and why they need to be a match

> <Note>
>   It is highly recommended and enforced by some identity providers to TLS-protect the
>   Assertion Consumer Service URLs. A warning will be returned from Vault if any of the
>   configured Assertion Consumer Service URLs are not protected by TLS.
> </Note>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some identiy providers require you to TLS-protect your Assertion Consumer
Service URLs. We strongly recommend using TLS even for providers that do not
require TLS-protection. Vault returns a warning for any ACS URL not protected by
TLS.
```

The intro paragraph for a new section shouldn't be an aside.

To support a single auth method mount being used across Vault [replication](/vault/docs/enterprise/replication)
clusters, `acs_urls` supports configuration of multiple values. For example, to support
SAML authentication on a primary and secondary Vault cluster, the following `acs_urls`
configuration could be given:

   ```shell-session
   $ vault write auth/saml/config \
      acs_urls="https://primary.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback,https://secondary.vault/v1/auth/saml/callback"
   ```

> The Vault UI and CLI will automatically request the proper Assertion Consumer Service URL
> for the cluster they're configured to communicate with. This means that the entirety of the
> authentication flow will stay within the local cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With replicated clusters, Vault automatically requests the proper ACS URL from
its configured cluster, which keeps the entirety of the authentication flow
within the local cluster.
```

> 

Author: + add note on how to configure the ACS for auth methods within namespaces.

Author: Done in https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/pull/23183/commits/b66428d63f126a4a9d64050c209e44688ded2d9c.

> ### Bound Attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Bound attributes
```

Style correction: use sentence case for headings

Author: Done for all sections in https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/pull/23183/commits/b611152c9b94909872a6cc31040ff726301ec63c

> Once the user has been authenticated the authorization flow will validate
> that both the [`bound_subject`](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#bound_subject) and
> [`bound_attributes`](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#bound_attributes) match expected
> values configured for the role. This can be used to restrict access to Vault for
> a subset of users in the SAML Identity Provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a user authenticates with the SAML identity provider, the authorization
flow validates that both the `bound_subjects` and `bound_attributes` match the
expected values for the SAML role. You can use the `bound` parameters to
restrict Vault access to a subset of users in the SAML identity provider.
```

Style correction: write in active voice.

For example, a role with `bound_subject=*@hashicorp.com` and

> `bound_attributes=groups=support,engineering` will only authorize users whose subject has
> an `@hashicorp.com` suffix and that are in either the `support` or `engineering` group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`bound_attributes=groups=support,engineering` will only authorize users in the `support` or `engineering` group with subjects that  have the `@hashicorp.com` suffix.
```

Style correction: write in the active voice

> Whether it should be an exact match or interpret `*` as a wildcard can be
> controlled by the [`bound_subject_type`](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#bound_subject_type) and
> [`bound_attributes_type`](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#bound_subject_type) parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Suggest removing this as we've already referred folks to the API docs for more information and we aren't really providing additional information by repeating the note about wildcard searches.

> [`bound_attributes_type`](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml#bound_subject_type) parameters.

Author: Good catch on all of these, thanks!

> ## API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learn more
```
To make it more obvious when folks have reached the end of a doc, we're trying to standardize on "Learn more" as the last section for overview docs and "Next steps" for how-to guides and providing one or more useful crosslinks under those sections.

> The SAML Auth Plugin has a full HTTP API. Please see the
> [API documentation](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SAML authentication plugin has a full HTTP API. Refer to the
[SAML API documentation](/vault/api-docs/auth/saml) for more details.
```
